README.md, before:

# JuliaLowering

[![Build Status](https://github.com/c42f/JuliaLowering.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/c42f/JuliaLowering.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml?query=branch%3Amain)

JuliaLowering.jl is an experimental port of Julia's code lowering compiler
passes, written in Julia itself. "Code lowering" is the set of compiler passes
which *symbolically* transform and simplify Julia's syntax prior to type
inference.

## Goals

This work is intended to
* Bring precise code provenance to Julia's lowered form (and eventually
  downstream in type inference, stack traces, etc). This has many benefits
    - Talk to users precisely about their code via character-precise error and
      diagnostic messages from lowering 
    - Greatly simplify the implementation of critical tools like Revise.jl
      which rely on analyzing how the user's source maps to the compiler's data
      structures
    - Allow tools like JuliaInterpreter to use type-inferred and optimized
      code, with the potential for huge speed improvements.
* Bring improvements for macro authors
    - Prototype "automatic hygiene" (no more need for `esc()`!)
    - Precise author-defined error reporting from macros
    - Sketch better interfaces for syntax trees (hopefully!)

## Trying it out

Note this is a very early work in progress; most things probably don't work!

1. Check out the caf/lowering-2 branch of JuliaSyntax.jl
2. Run the demo `include("test/lowering.jl")`

# Design Notes

Lowering has five symbolic simplification passes:

1. Macro expansion - expanding user-defined syntactic constructs by running the
   user's macros. This pass also includes a small amount of other symbolic
   simplification.
2. Syntax desugaring - simplifying Julia's rich surface syntax down to a small
   number of syntactic forms.
3. Scope analysis - analyzing identifier names used in the code to discover
   local variables, closure captures, and associate global variables to the
   appropriate module.
4. Closure conversion - convert closures to types and deal with captured
   variables efficiently where possible.
5. Flattening to linear IR - convert code in hierarchical tree form to a
   flat array of statements; convert control flow into gotos.

## Syntax trees

Want something something better than `JuliaSyntax.SyntaxNode`! `SyntaxTree` and
`SyntaxGraph` provide this. (These will probably end up in `JuliaSyntax`.)

We want to allow arbitrary attributes to be attached to tree nodes by analysis
passes. This separates the analysis pass implementation from the data
structure, allowing passes which don't know about each other to act on a shared
data structure.

Design and implementation inspiration comes in several analogies:

Analogy 1: the ECS (Entity-Component-System) pattern for computer game design.
This pattern is highly successful because it separates game logic (systems)
from game objects (entities) by providing flexible storage
* Compiler passes are "systems"
* AST tree nodes are "entities"
* Node attributes are "components"

Analogy 2: The AoS to SoA transformation. But here we've got a kind of
tree-of-structs-with-optional-attributes to struct-of-Dicts transformation.
The data alignment / packing efficiency and concrete type safe storage benefits
are similar.

Analogy 3: Graph algorithms which represent graphs as a compact array of node
ids and edges with integer indices, rather than using a linked data structure.

## Hygiene

### Problems with Hygiene in Julia's exiting macro system

To write correct hygienic macros in Julia (as of 2024), macro authors must use
`esc()` on any any syntax passed to the macro so that passed identifiers escape
to the macro caller scope. However

* This is not automatic and the correct use of `esc()` is one of the things
  that new macro authors find most confusing. (My impression, based on various
  people complaining about how confusing `esc()` is.)
* `esc()` wraps expressions in `Expr(:escape)`, but this doesn't work well when
  macros pass such escaped syntax to an inner macro call. As discussed in
  [Julia issue #37691](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/37691), macros
  in Julia's existing system are not composable by default. Writing
  composable macros in the existing system would require preserving the escape
  nesting depth when recursing into any macro argument nested expressions.
  Almost no macro author knows how to do this and is prepared to pay for the
  complexity of getting it right.

The requirement to use `esc()` stems from Julia's pervasive use of the simple
`Expr` data structure which represents a unadorned AST in which names are plain
symbols. For example, a macro call `@foo x` gets passed the  symbol `:x`
which is just a name without any information attached to indicate that it came
from the scope where `@foo` was called.

### Hygiene in JuliaLowering

In JuliaLowering we make hygiene automatic and remove `esc()` by combining names
with scope information. In the language of the paper [*Towards the Essence of
Hygiene*](https://michaeldadams.org/papers/hygiene/hygiene-2015-popl-authors-copy.pdf)
by Michael Adams, this combination is called a "syntax object". In
JuliaLowering our representation is the tuple `(name,scope_layer)`, also called
`VarId` in the scope resolution pass.

JuliaLowering's macro expander attaches a unique *scope layer* to each
identifier in a piece of syntax. A "scope layer" is an integer identifer
combined with the module in which the syntax was created.

When expanding macros,

* Any identifiers passed to the macro are tagged with the scope layer they were
  defined within.
* A new unique scope layer is generated for the macro invocation, and any names
  in the syntax produced by the macro are tagged with this layer.

Subsequently, the `(name,scope_layer)` pairs are used when resolving bindings.
This ensures that, by default, we satisfy the basic rules for hygenic macros
discussed in Adams' paper:

1. A macro can't insert a binding that can capture references other than those
   inserted by the macro.
2. A macro can't insert a reference that can be captured by bindings other than
   those inserted by the macro.

TODO: Write more here...

#### References

* [Toward Fearless Macros](https://lambdaland.org/posts/2023-10-17_fearless_macros) -
  a blog post by Ashton Wiersdorf
* [Towards the Essence of Hygiene](https://michaeldadams.org/papers/hygiene/hygiene-2015-popl-authors-copy.pdf) - a paper by Michael Adams
* [Bindings as sets of scopes](https://www-old.cs.utah.edu/plt/scope-sets/) - a description of Racket's scope set mechanism by Matthew Flatt

## Julia's existing lowering implementation

### How does macro expansion work?

`macroexpand(m::Module, x)` calls `jl_macroexpand` in ast.c:

```
jl_value_t *jl_macroexpand(jl_value_t *expr, jl_module_t *inmodule)
{
    expr = jl_copy_ast(expr);
    expr = jl_expand_macros(expr, inmodule, NULL, 0, jl_world_counter, 0);
    expr = jl_call_scm_on_ast("jl-expand-macroscope", expr, inmodule);
    return expr;
}
```

First we copy the AST here. This is mostly a trivial deep copy of `Expr`s and
shallow copy of their non-`Expr` children, except for when they contain
embedded `CodeInfo/phi/phic` nodes which are also deep copied.

Second we expand macros recursively by calling 

`jl_expand_macros(expr, inmodule, macroctx, onelevel, world, throw_load_error)`

This relies on state indexed by `inmodule` and `world`, which gives it some
funny properties:
* `module` expressions can't be expanded: macro expansion depends on macro
  lookup within the module, but we can't do that without `eval`.

Expansion proceeds from the outermost to innermost macros. So macros see any
macro calls or quasiquote (`quote/$`) in their children as unexpanded forms.

Things which are expanded:
* `quote` is expanded using flisp code in `julia-bq-macro`
  - symbol / ssavalue -> `QuoteNode` (inert)
  - atom -> itself
  - at depth zero, `$` expands to its content
  - Expressions `x` without `$` expand to `(copyast (inert x))`
  - Other expressions containing a `$` expand to a call to `_expr` with all the
    args mapped through `julia-bq-expand-`. Roughly!
  - Special handling exists for multi-splatting arguments as in `quote quote $$(x...) end end`
* `macrocall` proceeds with
  - Expand with `jl_invoke_julia_macro`
    - Call `eval` on the macro name (!!) to get the macro function. Look up
      the method.
    - Set up arguments for the macro calling convention 
    - Wraps errors in macro invocation in `LoadError`
    - Returns the expression, as well as the module at
      which that method of that macro was defined and `LineNumberNode` where
      the macro was invoked in the source.
  - Deep copy the AST
  - Recursively expand child macros in the context of the module where the
    macrocall method was defined
  - Wrap the result in `(hygienic-scope ,result ,newctx.m ,lineinfo)` (except
    for special case optimizations)
* `hygenic-scope` expands `args[1]` with `jl_expand_macros`, with the module
  of expansion set to `args[2]`.  Ie, it's the `Expr` representation of the
  module and expression arguments to `macroexpand`. The way this returns
  either `hygenic-scope` or unwraps is a bit confusing.
* "`do` macrocalls" have their own special handling because the macrocall is
  the child of the `do`. This seems like a mess!!


### Scope resolution

Scopes are documented in the Juila documentation on [Scope of Variables](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/variables-and-scoping/)

This pass disambiguates variables which have the same name in different scopes
and fills in the list of local variables within each lambda.

#### Which data is needed to define a scope?

As scope is a collection of variable names by category:
* `argument` - arguments to a lambda
* `local` - variables declared local (at top level) or implicitly local (in lambdas) or desugared to local-def
* `global` - variables declared global (in lambdas) or implicitly global (at top level)
* `static-parameter` - lambda type arguments from `where` clauses

#### How does scope resolution work?

We traverse the AST starting at the root paying attention to certian nodes:
* Nodes representing identifiers (Identifier, operators, var)
    - If a variable exists in the table, it's *replaced* with the value in the table.
    - If it doesn't exist, it becomes an `outerref`
* Variable scoping constructs: `local`, `local-def`
    - collected by scope-block
    - removed during traversal
* Scope metadata `softscope`, `hardscope` - just removed
* New scopes
    - `lambda` creates a new scope containing itself and its arguments,
      otherwise copying the parent scope. It resolves the body with that new scope.
    - `scope-block` is really complicated - see below
* Scope queries `islocal`, `locals`
    - `islocal` - statically expand to true/false based on whether var name is a local var
    - `locals` - return list of locals - see `@locals`
    - `require-existing-local` - somewhat like `islocal`, but allows globals
      too (whaa?! naming) and produces a lowering error immediately if variable
      is not known.  Should be called `require-in-scope` ??
* `break-block`, `symbolicgoto`, `symboliclabel` need special handling because
  one of their arguments is a non-quoted symbol.
* Add static parameters for generated functions `with-static-parameters`
* `method` - special handling for static params

`scope-block` is the complicated bit. It's processed by
* Searching the expressions within the block for any `local`, `local-def`,
  `global` and assigned vars. Searching doesn't recurse into `lambda`,
  `scope-block`, `module` and `toplevel`
* Building lists of implicit locals or globals (depending on whether we're in a
  top level thunk)
* Figuring out which local variables need to be renamed. This is any local variable
  with a name which has already occurred in processing one of the previous scope blocks
* Check any conflicting local/global decls and soft/hard scope
* Build new scope with table of renames
* Resolve the body with the new scope, applying the renames

### Intermediate forms used in lowering

* `local-def` - flisp code explains this as
  - "a local that we know has an assignment that dominates all usages"
  - "local declaration of a defined variable"

There's also this comment in https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/22314:

> mark the [...] variable as local-def, which would prevent it from getting Core.Boxed during the closure conversion it'll be detected as known-SSA

But maybe that's confusing. It seems like `local-def` is a local which lowering
asserts is "always defined" / "definitely initialized before use". But it's not
necessarily single-assign, so not SSA.

### Lowered IR

See https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/devdocs/ast/#Lowered-form

#### CodeInfo

```julia
mutable struct CodeInfo
    code::Vector{Any}             # IR statements
    codelocs::Vector{Int32}       # `length(code)` Vector of indices into `linetable`
    ssavaluetypes::Any            # `length(code)` or Vector of inferred types after opt
    ssaflags::Vector{UInt32}      # flag for every statement in `code`
                                  #   0 if meta statement
                                  #   inbounds_flag - 1 bit (LSB)
                                  #   inline_flag   - 1 bit
                                  #   noinline_flag - 1 bit
                                  #   ... other 8 flags which are defined in compiler/optimize.jl
                                  #   effects_flags - 9 bits
    method_for_inference_limit_heuristics::Any
    linetable::Any
    slotnames::Vector{Symbol}     # names of parameters and local vars used in the code
    slotflags::Vector{UInt8}      # vinfo flags from flisp
    slottypes::Any                # nothing (used by typeinf)
    rettype::Any                  # Any (used by typeinf)
    parent::Any                   # nothing (used by typeinf)
    edges::Any
    min_world::UInt64
    max_world::UInt64
    inferred::Bool
    propagate_inbounds::Bool
    has_fcall::Bool
    nospecializeinfer::Bool
    inlining::UInt8
    constprop::UInt8
    purity::UInt16
    inlining_cost::UInt16
end
```

### Notes on toplevel-only forms and eval-related functions

In the current Julia runtime,

`Base.eval()`
- Uses `jl_toplevel_eval_in` which calls `jl_toplevel_eval_flex`

`jl_toplevel_eval_flex(mod, ex)`
- Lowers if necessay
- Evaluates certain blessed top level forms
  * `:.`
  * `:module`
  * `:using`
  * `:import`
  * `:public`
  * `:export`
  * `:global`
  * `:const`
  * `:toplevel`
  * `:error`
  * `:incomplete`
  * Identifier and literals
- Otherwise expects `Expr(:thunk)`
  * Use codegen "where necessary/profitable" (eg ccall, has_loops etc)
  * Otherwise interpret via `jl_interpret_toplevel_thunk`

Should we lower the above blessed top level forms to julia runtime calls?
Pros:
- Semantically sound. Lowering should do syntax checking in things like
  `Expr(:using)` rather than doing this in the runtime support functions.
- Precise lowering error messages
- Replaces more Expr usage
- Replaces a whole pile of C code with significantly less Julia code
- Lowering output becomes more consistently imperative
Cons: 
- Lots more code to write
- May need to invent intermediate data structures to replace `Expr`
- Bootstrap?
- Some forms require creating toplevel thunks

In general, we'd be replacing current *declarative* lowering targets like
`Expr(:using)` with an *imperative* call to a `Core` API instead. The call and
the setup of its arguments would need to go in a thunk. We've currently got an
odd mixture of imperative and declarative lowered code.


## Notes on racket's hygiene

People look at [Racket](https://racket-lang.org/) as an example of a very
complete system of hygienic macros. We should learn from them, but keeping in
mind that Racket's macro system is more inherently more complicated. Racket's
current approach to hygiene is described in an [accessible talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Or_yKiI3Ha4)
and in more depth in [a paper](https://www-old.cs.utah.edu/plt/publications/popl16-f.pdf).

Some differences which makes Racket's macro expander different from Julia:

* Racket allows *local* definitions of macros. Macro code can be embedded in an
  inner lexical scope and capture locals from that scope, but still needs to be
  executed at compile time. Julia supports macros at top level scope only.
* Racket goes to great lengths to execute the minimal package code necessary to
  expand macros; the "pass system". Julia just executes all top level
  statements in order when precompiling a package.
* As a lisp, Racket's surface syntax is dramatically simpler and more uniform

Commit message:

Update CodeInfo layout to Julia version 1.12.0-DEV.512

README.md, after:

# JuliaLowering

[![Build Status](https://github.com/c42f/JuliaLowering.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/c42f/JuliaLowering.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml?query=branch%3Amain)

JuliaLowering.jl is an experimental port of Julia's code lowering compiler
passes, written in Julia itself. "Code lowering" is the set of compiler passes
which *symbolically* transform and simplify Julia's syntax prior to type
inference.

## Goals

This work is intended to
* Bring precise code provenance to Julia's lowered form (and eventually
  downstream in type inference, stack traces, etc). This has many benefits
    - Talk to users precisely about their code via character-precise error and
      diagnostic messages from lowering 
    - Greatly simplify the implementation of critical tools like Revise.jl
      which rely on analyzing how the user's source maps to the compiler's data
      structures
    - Allow tools like JuliaInterpreter to use type-inferred and optimized
      code, with the potential for huge speed improvements.
* Bring improvements for macro authors
    - Prototype "automatic hygiene" (no more need for `esc()`!)
    - Precise author-defined error reporting from macros
    - Sketch better interfaces for syntax trees (hopefully!)

## Trying it out

Note this is a very early work in progress; most things probably don't work!

1. Use a recent dev version of Julia (need at least version 1.12.0-DEV.512)
2. Check out the caf/lowering-2 branch of [JuliaSyntax](https://github.com/JuliaLang/JuliaSyntax.jl)
3. Get the latest version of [JuliaSyntaxFormatter](https://github.com/c42f/JuliaSyntaxFormatter.jl)
4. Run the demo `include("test/demo.jl")`

# Design Notes

Lowering has five symbolic simplification passes:

1. Macro expansion - expanding user-defined syntactic constructs by running the
   user's macros. This pass also includes a small amount of other symbolic
   simplification.
2. Syntax desugaring - simplifying Julia's rich surface syntax down to a small
   number of syntactic forms.
3. Scope analysis - analyzing identifier names used in the code to discover
   local variables, closure captures, and associate global variables to the
   appropriate module.
4. Closure conversion - convert closures to types and deal with captured
   variables efficiently where possible.
5. Flattening to linear IR - convert code in hierarchical tree form to a
   flat array of statements; convert control flow into gotos.

## Syntax trees

Want something something better than `JuliaSyntax.SyntaxNode`! `SyntaxTree` and
`SyntaxGraph` provide this. (These will probably end up in `JuliaSyntax`.)

We want to allow arbitrary attributes to be attached to tree nodes by analysis
passes. This separates the analysis pass implementation from the data
structure, allowing passes which don't know about each other to act on a shared
data structure.

Design and implementation inspiration comes in several analogies:

Analogy 1: the ECS (Entity-Component-System) pattern for computer game design.
This pattern is highly successful because it separates game logic (systems)
from game objects (entities) by providing flexible storage
* Compiler passes are "systems"
* AST tree nodes are "entities"
* Node attributes are "components"

Analogy 2: The AoS to SoA transformation. But here we've got a kind of
tree-of-structs-with-optional-attributes to struct-of-Dicts transformation.
The data alignment / packing efficiency and concrete type safe storage benefits
are similar.

Analogy 3: Graph algorithms which represent graphs as a compact array of node
ids and edges with integer indices, rather than using a linked data structure.

## Hygiene

### Problems with Hygiene in Julia's exiting macro system

To write correct hygienic macros in Julia (as of 2024), macro authors must use
`esc()` on any any syntax passed to the macro so that passed identifiers escape
to the macro caller scope. However

* This is not automatic and the correct use of `esc()` is one of the things
  that new macro authors find most confusing. (My impression, based on various
  people complaining about how confusing `esc()` is.)
* `esc()` wraps expressions in `Expr(:escape)`, but this doesn't work well when
  macros pass such escaped syntax to an inner macro call. As discussed in
  [Julia issue #37691](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/37691), macros
  in Julia's existing system are not composable by default. Writing
  composable macros in the existing system would require preserving the escape
  nesting depth when recursing into any macro argument nested expressions.
  Almost no macro author knows how to do this and is prepared to pay for the
  complexity of getting it right.

The requirement to use `esc()` stems from Julia's pervasive use of the simple
`Expr` data structure which represents a unadorned AST in which names are plain
symbols. For example, a macro call `@foo x` gets passed the  symbol `:x`
which is just a name without any information attached to indicate that it came
from the scope where `@foo` was called.

### Hygiene in JuliaLowering

In JuliaLowering we make hygiene automatic and remove `esc()` by combining names
with scope information. In the language of the paper [*Towards the Essence of
Hygiene*](https://michaeldadams.org/papers/hygiene/hygiene-2015-popl-authors-copy.pdf)
by Michael Adams, this combination is called a "syntax object". In
JuliaLowering our representation is the tuple `(name,scope_layer)`, also called
`VarId` in the scope resolution pass.

JuliaLowering's macro expander attaches a unique *scope layer* to each
identifier in a piece of syntax. A "scope layer" is an integer identifer
combined with the module in which the syntax was created.

When expanding macros,

* Any identifiers passed to the macro are tagged with the scope layer they were
  defined within.
* A new unique scope layer is generated for the macro invocation, and any names
  in the syntax produced by the macro are tagged with this layer.

Subsequently, the `(name,scope_layer)` pairs are used when resolving bindings.
This ensures that, by default, we satisfy the basic rules for hygenic macros
discussed in Adams' paper:

1. A macro can't insert a binding that can capture references other than those
   inserted by the macro.
2. A macro can't insert a reference that can be captured by bindings other than
   those inserted by the macro.

TODO: Write more here...

#### References

* [Toward Fearless Macros](https://lambdaland.org/posts/2023-10-17_fearless_macros) -
  a blog post by Ashton Wiersdorf
* [Towards the Essence of Hygiene](https://michaeldadams.org/papers/hygiene/hygiene-2015-popl-authors-copy.pdf) - a paper by Michael Adams
* [Bindings as sets of scopes](https://www-old.cs.utah.edu/plt/scope-sets/) - a description of Racket's scope set mechanism by Matthew Flatt

## Julia's existing lowering implementation

### How does macro expansion work?

`macroexpand(m::Module, x)` calls `jl_macroexpand` in ast.c:

```
jl_value_t *jl_macroexpand(jl_value_t *expr, jl_module_t *inmodule)
{
    expr = jl_copy_ast(expr);
    expr = jl_expand_macros(expr, inmodule, NULL, 0, jl_world_counter, 0);
    expr = jl_call_scm_on_ast("jl-expand-macroscope", expr, inmodule);
    return expr;
}
```

First we copy the AST here. This is mostly a trivial deep copy of `Expr`s and
shallow copy of their non-`Expr` children, except for when they contain
embedded `CodeInfo/phi/phic` nodes which are also deep copied.

Second we expand macros recursively by calling 

`jl_expand_macros(expr, inmodule, macroctx, onelevel, world, throw_load_error)`

This relies on state indexed by `inmodule` and `world`, which gives it some
funny properties:
* `module` expressions can't be expanded: macro expansion depends on macro
  lookup within the module, but we can't do that without `eval`.

Expansion proceeds from the outermost to innermost macros. So macros see any
macro calls or quasiquote (`quote/$`) in their children as unexpanded forms.

Things which are expanded:
* `quote` is expanded using flisp code in `julia-bq-macro`
  - symbol / ssavalue -> `QuoteNode` (inert)
  - atom -> itself
  - at depth zero, `$` expands to its content
  - Expressions `x` without `$` expand to `(copyast (inert x))`
  - Other expressions containing a `$` expand to a call to `_expr` with all the
    args mapped through `julia-bq-expand-`. Roughly!
  - Special handling exists for multi-splatting arguments as in `quote quote $$(x...) end end`
* `macrocall` proceeds with
  - Expand with `jl_invoke_julia_macro`
    - Call `eval` on the macro name (!!) to get the macro function. Look up
      the method.
    - Set up arguments for the macro calling convention 
    - Wraps errors in macro invocation in `LoadError`
    - Returns the expression, as well as the module at
      which that method of that macro was defined and `LineNumberNode` where
      the macro was invoked in the source.
  - Deep copy the AST
  - Recursively expand child macros in the context of the module where the
    macrocall method was defined
  - Wrap the result in `(hygienic-scope ,result ,newctx.m ,lineinfo)` (except
    for special case optimizations)
* `hygenic-scope` expands `args[1]` with `jl_expand_macros`, with the module
  of expansion set to `args[2]`.  Ie, it's the `Expr` representation of the
  module and expression arguments to `macroexpand`. The way this returns
  either `hygenic-scope` or unwraps is a bit confusing.
* "`do` macrocalls" have their own special handling because the macrocall is
  the child of the `do`. This seems like a mess!!


### Scope resolution

Scopes are documented in the Juila documentation on [Scope of Variables](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/variables-and-scoping/)

This pass disambiguates variables which have the same name in different scopes
and fills in the list of local variables within each lambda.

#### Which data is needed to define a scope?

As scope is a collection of variable names by category:
* `argument` - arguments to a lambda
* `local` - variables declared local (at top level) or implicitly local (in lambdas) or desugared to local-def
* `global` - variables declared global (in lambdas) or implicitly global (at top level)
* `static-parameter` - lambda type arguments from `where` clauses

#### How does scope resolution work?

We traverse the AST starting at the root paying attention to certian nodes:
* Nodes representing identifiers (Identifier, operators, var)
    - If a variable exists in the table, it's *replaced* with the value in the table.
    - If it doesn't exist, it becomes an `outerref`
* Variable scoping constructs: `local`, `local-def`
    - collected by scope-block
    - removed during traversal
* Scope metadata `softscope`, `hardscope` - just removed
* New scopes
    - `lambda` creates a new scope containing itself and its arguments,
      otherwise copying the parent scope. It resolves the body with that new scope.
    - `scope-block` is really complicated - see below
* Scope queries `islocal`, `locals`
    - `islocal` - statically expand to true/false based on whether var name is a local var
    - `locals` - return list of locals - see `@locals`
    - `require-existing-local` - somewhat like `islocal`, but allows globals
      too (whaa?! naming) and produces a lowering error immediately if variable
      is not known.  Should be called `require-in-scope` ??
* `break-block`, `symbolicgoto`, `symboliclabel` need special handling because
  one of their arguments is a non-quoted symbol.
* Add static parameters for generated functions `with-static-parameters`
* `method` - special handling for static params

`scope-block` is the complicated bit. It's processed by
* Searching the expressions within the block for any `local`, `local-def`,
  `global` and assigned vars. Searching doesn't recurse into `lambda`,
  `scope-block`, `module` and `toplevel`
* Building lists of implicit locals or globals (depending on whether we're in a
  top level thunk)
* Figuring out which local variables need to be renamed. This is any local variable
  with a name which has already occurred in processing one of the previous scope blocks
* Check any conflicting local/global decls and soft/hard scope
* Build new scope with table of renames
* Resolve the body with the new scope, applying the renames

### Intermediate forms used in lowering

* `local-def` - flisp code explains this as
  - "a local that we know has an assignment that dominates all usages"
  - "local declaration of a defined variable"

There's also this comment in https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/22314:

> mark the [...] variable as local-def, which would prevent it from getting Core.Boxed during the closure conversion it'll be detected as known-SSA

But maybe that's confusing. It seems like `local-def` is a local which lowering
asserts is "always defined" / "definitely initialized before use". But it's not
necessarily single-assign, so not SSA.

### Lowered IR

See https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/devdocs/ast/#Lowered-form

#### CodeInfo

```julia
mutable struct CodeInfo
    code::Vector{Any}             # IR statements
    codelocs::Vector{Int32}       # `length(code)` Vector of indices into `linetable`
    ssavaluetypes::Any            # `length(code)` or Vector of inferred types after opt
    ssaflags::Vector{UInt32}      # flag for every statement in `code`
                                  #   0 if meta statement
                                  #   inbounds_flag - 1 bit (LSB)
                                  #   inline_flag   - 1 bit
                                  #   noinline_flag - 1 bit
                                  #   ... other 8 flags which are defined in compiler/optimize.jl
                                  #   effects_flags - 9 bits
    method_for_inference_limit_heuristics::Any
    linetable::Any
    slotnames::Vector{Symbol}     # names of parameters and local vars used in the code
    slotflags::Vector{UInt8}      # vinfo flags from flisp
    slottypes::Any                # nothing (used by typeinf)
    rettype::Any                  # Any (used by typeinf)
    parent::Any                   # nothing (used by typeinf)
    edges::Any
    min_world::UInt64
    max_world::UInt64
    inferred::Bool
    propagate_inbounds::Bool
    has_fcall::Bool
    nospecializeinfer::Bool
    inlining::UInt8
    constprop::UInt8
    purity::UInt16
    inlining_cost::UInt16
end
```

### Notes on toplevel-only forms and eval-related functions

In the current Julia runtime,

`Base.eval()`
- Uses `jl_toplevel_eval_in` which calls `jl_toplevel_eval_flex`

`jl_toplevel_eval_flex(mod, ex)`
- Lowers if necessay
- Evaluates certain blessed top level forms
  * `:.`
  * `:module`
  * `:using`
  * `:import`
  * `:public`
  * `:export`
  * `:global`
  * `:const`
  * `:toplevel`
  * `:error`
  * `:incomplete`
  * Identifier and literals
- Otherwise expects `Expr(:thunk)`
  * Use codegen "where necessary/profitable" (eg ccall, has_loops etc)
  * Otherwise interpret via `jl_interpret_toplevel_thunk`

Should we lower the above blessed top level forms to julia runtime calls?
Pros:
- Semantically sound. Lowering should do syntax checking in things like
  `Expr(:using)` rather than doing this in the runtime support functions.
- Precise lowering error messages
- Replaces more Expr usage
- Replaces a whole pile of C code with significantly less Julia code
- Lowering output becomes more consistently imperative
Cons: 
- Lots more code to write
- May need to invent intermediate data structures to replace `Expr`
- Bootstrap?
- Some forms require creating toplevel thunks

In general, we'd be replacing current *declarative* lowering targets like
`Expr(:using)` with an *imperative* call to a `Core` API instead. The call and
the setup of its arguments would need to go in a thunk. We've currently got an
odd mixture of imperative and declarative lowered code.


## Notes on racket's hygiene

People look at [Racket](https://racket-lang.org/) as an example of a very
complete system of hygienic macros. We should learn from them, but keeping in
mind that Racket's macro system is more inherently more complicated. Racket's
current approach to hygiene is described in an [accessible talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Or_yKiI3Ha4)
and in more depth in [a paper](https://www-old.cs.utah.edu/plt/publications/popl16-f.pdf).

Some differences which makes Racket's macro expander different from Julia:

* Racket allows *local* definitions of macros. Macro code can be embedded in an
  inner lexical scope and capture locals from that scope, but still needs to be
  executed at compile time. Julia supports macros at top level scope only.
* Racket goes to great lengths to execute the minimal package code necessary to
  expand macros; the "pass system". Julia just executes all top level
  statements in order when precompiling a package.
* As a lisp, Racket's surface syntax is dramatically simpler and more uniform
